# ew -- an egrep wrapper in bash

PROJECT ABANDONED (replaced by a few lines of code in an rc file; see below)

----

I no longer use this code.  It's been replaced by the following lines in my
`~/.__rc`

    ## ew:ew pattern [paths] [-G include-glob ...]
    ## ew:cmd | ew pattern
    ## ew:(note: may have some space-in-filenames issues)
    ew	_rg	-x "/usr/bin/rg" or -x "/usr/local/bin/rg" or -x "$ENV{HOME}/bin/rg"
    ew	_ew
    _ew %	_ew %1
        ?   $ENV{_I} = "-i"; $ENV{_R} = "-r";       # ignore case on, recurse on
            $ENV{_I} = "" if "%1" =~ /^[A-Z]/;      # ignore case off if contains uppercase letter
            $ENV{_R} = "" if $ENV{_tty} == 0;       # recurse off if pipe
    _ew %%	_ew %?
        ?   my $x = "%1"; $x =~ s/ -G (\S+)/ --include "$1"/g; $x;
    _ew	grep -E -D skip --exclude-dir=.git --color=auto -I $_R $_I
    _rg	rg --hidden -g '!.git' -S

The bulk of those lines implement `ew` using my "active aliases" tool (see
below the dashed line for more on that).

The first and last lines... what can I say?  I am **blown away** by
[ripgrep](https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep).  This is also probably the
first time I was swayed to switching to a tool simply by the depth of a
[blogpost](http://blog.burntsushi.net/ripgrep/) about it.

Honestly, grep itself would be fine, with suitable options (like
`--exclude-dir`), but it lacks the crucial **smartcase** feature, something I
consider absolutely indispensable for day-to-day use.

However, I often do multiple searches in log files (where the same file is
read again and again, with iterative changes in the regex), and the speed
difference is sometimes (though not always) noticeable.

----

So what exactly is that code there?

The `.__rc` file is essentially code that morphs a command as it goes through
the rules that match, and executes what comes out at the end.  See
<https://github.com/sitaramc/active-aliases> for more.

These few lines replace the 40+ lines of code that make up 'ew', while
providing all the features that 'ew' did.  Take a look at active-aliases if
you're interested; it's a pretty nifty little tool.  Some of the examples in
the documentation may even surprise you!

----

ew is an 'egrep wrapper' that

*   forces recursion in $PWD when input is a terminal
*   ignores binary files
*   emulates ack's smartcase (adds '-i' flag if the pattern has no upper case
    characters)
*   emulates ack's '-G' option by translating it to egrep's '--include'.
    *   (However, this uses a glob, not a pattern, so instead of `-G foo` you
        have to say `-G '*foo*'`.  I don't use this often enough to care.  It
        also seems like ack has now removed this option too)
*   passes any other options to egrep

VCS exclusions are handled by (separately) settting this in your env, though
it would be trivial to add that into the script as well, if needed:

     export GREP_OPTIONS="--exclude-dir=.git"

## comparison with ag and ack

Don't read this if your 'grep' needs are limited to files with specific,
well-known, file extensions.

Recently a [new contender][ag] for the "fast grep" throne has appeared. I
spent a few minutes doing some quick comparisons between these three:

*   ack is *always* slower (usually *much* slower) than the other two.

*   ag is fastest.  *Always* far faster than ack, and *sometimes* far faster
    than ew.  See next bullet.

*   ew is *marginally* slower than ag if you have a pattern that does not
    invoke smartcasing (i.e., does not pass `-i` to grep).

    But if smartcasing is invoked it becomes MUCH slower.  For example, `ew
    xxx` is much slower than `ew [xX][xX][xX]`!

    It may be a DFA/NFA thing, but whatever it is, that `-i` is really taking
    a toll on egrep!  No idea how to fix that (if it can be fixed at all!)

However, I won't use ag.  It has **stupid behaviour** like this:

    ag Free /proc/meminfo   # produces nothing!

This reminds me too much of the nightmare that ack was, and all the reasons I
stopped using ack back in the day. In fact you can blame ack for my
unwillingness to give ag a chance -- I refuse to try anything that claims to
be a successor to ack!

Details follow (if you care) but **TLDR**: these tools reject a lot more files
behind the scenes than they are willing to document (that /proc/meminfo
example being one).

## appendix: why I went from loving ack to hating it

I have no idea if things have improved in the last few years, but I really
have no interest in keeping track of a project whose author has the gall to
say ["There's really no English that explains how it works"][1] when asked to
document the file selection logic.

Curiously, it was not that ill-advised comment that made me stop using ack. I
still loved ack, so I attempted to help the author with his lack of English
skills ;-)

Big mistake.  The [file selection logic][2] was crazy.  For example, consider
the guy who started that thread -- it turned out that ack would search files
whose content started with `<?xml` but ignore files that started with
`<!DOCTYPE`.  WTF??

So anyway, once I wrote down the file selection logic and emailed the list, I
sat down to think.  And quickly realised there's no way I could use something
so bloody arbitrary.

The irony is that something I did because I loved the program made me realise
what a steaming pile of dog-poo it was.

(Actually, that's not the worst of ack.  At one time, using it to search STDIN
would end up searching the *current directory* if STDIN happened to be empty!
If the pipe happened to contain even one byte, it would work as expected.
Luckily someone sent a patch to to fix that.  After a [lot of discussion][3],
at least some of which seemed to be implying "this was intended".  Uggh...)

[1]: http://groups.google.com/group/ack-users/browse_thread/thread/ae646df76cc15259
[2]: http://groups.google.com/group/ack-users/browse_thread/thread/91d95a012be2905a
[3]: https://groups.google.com/d/msg/ack-users/oa82NsPqhvo/Y2f0RTnY5dEJ

[ag]: https://github.com/ggreer/the_silver_searcher
